
\documentclass[a4paper,useAMS,usenatbib]{mnras}

\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{setspace}
\usepackage{natbib}
\usepackage{color}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{times}
%\usepackage{aas_macros}
\usepackage{hyperref}


%\voffset-.4in

%\AtBeginShipout{%
%  \ifnum\value{page}>1 %
%    \typeout{* Additional boxing of page `\thepage'}%
%    \setbox\AtBeginShipoutBox=\hbox{\copy\AtBeginShipoutBox}%
%  \fi
%}


\bibliographystyle{mnras}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\newcommand{\Gaia}{{\it Gaia}}
\newcommand{\gaia}{\textit{Gaia} }

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\title[Orphan Stream in \gaia DR2]{Piercing the Milky Way. Orphan
  Stream in \gaia DR2}

\author[The OATs Collaboration]{The OATs Collaboration: Orphan Aspen Treasury\\
  $^{1}$Institute of Astronomy, Madingley Rd, Cambridge, CB3 0HA\\
  $^{2}$Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA\\
  $^{3}$Department of Physics, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH, UK\\
}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\label{firstpage}

\begin{abstract}
We use astrometry, broad-band photometry and variability information
from the Data Release 2 of the ESA's Gaia mission (GDR2) to identify
members of the Orphan Stream (OS) across the whole sky. The stream is
traced above and below the celestial equator and in both Galactic
hemispheres, thus increasing its visible length to $\sim210^{\circ}$
equivalent to $\sim150$ kpc in physical extent. Taking advantage of a
large number of RR Lyrae in the OS, we extract accurate distances and
proper motions across the entire stretch of the tidal debris
studied. Delineated with the GDR2 RR Lyrae, the stream exhibits two
prominent twists in its shape on the sky accompanied by changes in the
tangential motion. We complement the RR Lyrae maps with those created
using GDR2 Red Giants and the DECaLS Main Sequence Turn-Off stars. The
behavior of the OS track on the sky is consistent across all three
tracers employed. For the first time, we detect a strong non-zero
motion in the across-stream direction for a substantial portion of the
stream under the Galactic plane. Such a misalignment between the
debris track and the streaming velocity can not be reproduced in a
static gravitational potential and requires an interaction with a
massive perturber.

\end{abstract}

\begin{keywords}
Milky Way -- galaxies: dwarf -- galaxies: structure -- Local Group -- stars
\end{keywords}

\section{Introduction}

Long and narrow streams made up of stars tidally removed from low-mass
satellites offer a direct, powerful and versatile means of probing the
Galaxy's gravity field \citep[see e.g.][]{Donald1982, Kuhn1993,
  Donald1995,Johnston1996,Helmi1999,Johnston1999,Murali1999}. Discussed
predominantly from a theoretical standpoint in the last decades of the
past century, stellar streams started to be discovered in large
numbers relatively recently
\citep[e.g.][]{Ibata2001,Odenkirchen2001,Newberg2002,
  Majewski2003,FOS,Grillmair2006}. Deep wide-area imaging data played
the crucial role: the Sloan Digital Sky Survey \citep[SDSS,
  see][]{Gunn1998,York2000,SDSS_DR8,SDSS_DR12} opened the floodgate
\citep[e.g.][]{OS_C,OS_V,Grillmair2009,Newberg2009,Koposov2012,
  Bonaca2012} and other surveys followed
\citep[e.g.][]{Koposov2014,Bernard2016,Balbinot2016}, culminating most
recently with the discovery of 11 new streams in the Dark Energy
Survey data \citep[DES, see][]{DES2005,DES2016} by \citet{Shipp2018}.

The arrival of the \gaia data \citep[see][]{Prusti2016, Brown2018} has
helped to push the stellar stream identification into even lower
surface brightness regime through the addition of all-sky
high-precession astrometry
\citep[see][]{Myeong2018,Ibata2018,Koppelman2018,Malhan2018,Adrian2018,CloudsArms}.
\Gaia's parallaxes and proper motions are valuable not only because
they can be used to beat down the overpowering intervening Galactic
foreground. The utility of a stellar tidal stream springs as soon as
the kinematic information is added as demonstrated convincingly by
\citet{Koposov2010}. For example, the streaming velocity, i.e. the
component of the motion in the direction aligned with the stream, sets
the normalization for the mass inside of the debris orbit, while the
across-stream velocity informs of the possible perturbations
\citep[see e.g.][]{Erkal2018}.

%
\begin{figure*}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.95\textwidth]{orphan_paper_xyz.pdf}
  \caption[]{Galacto-centric distributions of the $\sim1,500$ \gaia
    DR2 RR Lyrae stars projected close to the OS on the sky. Only
    stars with $|\phi_2|<4^{\circ}$ and $-300<v_l <-100$, $-300<v_b
    <300$ are shown. {\it Left:} $X,Z$ plane. {\it Middle:} $Y,Z$
    plane. {\it Right:} $X,Y$ plane. Note a prominent, narrow and long
    stream-like over-density visible in all three panels.}
   \label{fig:xyzgdr2}
\end{figure*}
%

One of the first stellar streams discovered as the SDSS unleashed its
data on the unsuspecting community was Orphan
\citep[see][]{OS_C,OS_V}. Ten years later, the stream remains so,
literally, as no plausible progenitor has been identified to date,
although attempts have been made
\citep[e.g.][]{Fellhauer2007,Jin2007,Sales2008,Casey2013,Casey2014,Grillmair2015}. While
the stream's view has been extended somewhat below the celestial
equator, no trace of the stream has been found in the Southern
Galactic hemisphere so far. After some initial confusion, the orbit
of the stream was clarified in \citet{Newberg2010} who took advantage
of the wide-area low-resolution spectroscopy provided by the SDSS and
the Sloan Extension for Galactic Underpinning and Evolution
(SEGUE). Equally important role was played by the Blue Horizontal
Branch (BHB) stars used by \citet{Newberg2010} to nail down the
distances to the debris and thus reveal the 3D shape of the
stream. Given the distance gradient and the line-of-sight velocities,
the direction of the stream motion became immediately apparent. In the
Galactic coordinates, the OS is moving up (as defined by the Galactic
North), hence the part of the stream observed by the SDSS is leading
the presumed missing section below the Milky Way's disc. By fitting
orbits to the detected portions of the OS, \citet{Newberg2010}
determined the stream's extrema, placing the peri-center at $\sim16$
kpc and the apo-center at $\sim90$ kpc.

Conveniently, not only the OS contains plenty of BHBs, it also boasts
a prominent RR Lyrae population \cite[see e.g.][]{Sesar2013}. In the
optical, RR Lyrae are slightly better standard candles compared to the
BHB stars. Importantly however, RR Lyrae suffer no contamination,
while BHBs can be confused with Blue Stragglers and occasionally with
White Dwarfs and/or QSOs \citep[see e.g.][]{Deason2014}. An additional
perk of using RR Lyrae is that a rough estimate of the star's
metallicity can be obtained based on the lightcurve
shape. \citet{Sesar2013} identified $\sim30$ RR Lyrae likely belonging
to the OS using a combination of Catalina Real-Time Sky Survey (CRTS),
Lincoln Near Earth Asteroid Research (LINEAR) survey, and the Palomar
Transient Factory (PTF). While the RRLs are scattered rather sparsely
along the stream, approximately one member star per 2-3 degrees on the
sky, they are nonetheless easily discernible from the bulk of the
Milky Way stellar halo. The RR Lyrae's period-luminosity relation is
sufficiently tight and steep in the near-infrared. Accordingly,
\citet{Hendel2018} used the Spitzer IRAC 3.6$\mu$m to follow-up the
RRLs identified in \citet{Sesar2013} and measure distances to the
individual OS stars with uncertainty of order of $\sim2.5\%$.

%
\begin{figure*}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{rrlyrae_selection_plot.pdf}
  \caption[]{The selection of Orphan stream RR-Lyrae in various
    projections of the data. Each of the panels below shows the
    selection of stars from other panels.{\it Top panel:} The density
    of RR Lyrae on the sky in stream coordinates. The star selection
    used for this plot is using the distance and proper motion
    information. The blue band shows our selection region on the
    sky. {\it Middle panel:} The heliocentric distance to RR Lyrae as
    a function of angle along the stream. The sample of stars uses the
    selection based on the track on the sky and proper motion (defined
    in bottom and top panels). The blue band illustrates the selection
    band in distance. {\it Bottom panel:} The proper motion along
    $\phi_1$ vs the angle along the stream. The sample of stars shown
    on the panel is based on selections shown on top and middle
    panels. The blue band shows the selection based on proper motion.
  }
   \label{fig:selection}
\end{figure*}
%

%
\begin{figure*}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.97\textwidth]{orphan_paper_xyz_members.pdf}
  \caption[]{Same as Figure~\ref{fig:xyzgdr2} but limited to likely OS
    member RR Lyrae (see Figure~\ref{fig:selection} and main text for
    details). Long curved arrow shows the direction of motion of the
    OS, while the short straight arrow indicates the motion of the Sun
    (shown as grey filled circle at $(X,Y,Z)=(8,0,0)$.}
   \label{fig:xyzmem}
\end{figure*}
%

%
\begin{figure*}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.9\textwidth]{orphan_paper_phi1_members.pdf}
  \caption[]{Phase-space projections of the likely OS member RR Lyrae
    as a function of the stream longitude $\phi_1$. {\it Top left:}
    Positions of the OS stars on the sky in the stream-aligned
    coordinates $\phi_1, phi_2$. {\it Top right:} Heliocentric
    distance as a function of $\phi_1$. {\it Second row, left:} RA
    component of proper motion $\mu_{\alpha}$. {\it Second row,
      right:} Dec component of proper motion $\mu_{\delta}$. {\it
      Third row, left:} Velocity component along Galactic longitude
    $v_l$. {\it Third row, right:} Velocity component along Galactic
    latitude $v_b$. {\it Bottom left:} Along-stream velocity
    $v_{\phi,1}$. {\it Bottom right:} Across-stream velocity
    $v_{\phi,2}$.}
   \label{fig:memother}
\end{figure*}
%

Here we provide the first all-sky map of the Orphan Stream mapped with
a range of stellar tracers. We start with the \gaia DR2 (GDR2) RR
Lyrae, the largest set of RR Lyrae available to date
\citep[see][]{Clementini2018,Holl2018}. The \gaia DR2 RR Lyrae are
identified and characterised in the optical where the
period-luminosity relation is rather flat, thus yielding distance
estimates inferior to those obtained using infrared data, but
nonetheless very competitive, with typical uncertainties
$<10\%$. Despite the high purity (outside of the Galactic plane) and
impressive completeness (for heliocentric distances below 70 kpc), the
GDR2 RR Lyrae sample remains relatively unexplored in terms of the
Galactic halo studies \citep[e.g.][]{Iorio2018, Torrealba2018}. To
complement the OS RR Lyrae detections we study the stream with other
stellar tracers, including GDR2 Red Giants and DECALS (CITATIONS
NEEDED) Red Giants Main Sequence Turn-off stars.

This Paper is organised as follows. Section~\ref{sec:rrl} presents the
details of the RR Lyrae selection from the Gaia DR2 data as well as
the selection of the likely Orphan Stream members. The Section also
gives the distributions of the OS RR Lyrae in various projections of
the phase-space, spanned by the three spatial coordinates and two
tangential velocities. Section~\ref{sec:rgb} maps the stream using
Gaia Red Giant stars as well as using the matched filter technique
applied to the deep DECaLS imaging. Additionally, the Section shows
the OS Color-Magnitude Diagram and discusses the sub-set of the stream
members with available SDSS
spectroscopy. Finally. Section~\ref{sec:conc} puts the new detections
of the stream into contexts and provides concluding remarks.

\section{Orphan Stream with \gaia DR2 RR Lyrae}
\label{sec:rrl}

We select a high-purity all-sky sample of RR Lyrae candidate stars
from two separate source catalogues released as part of the \gaia DR2
\citep[][]{Prusti2016, Brown2018}. More precisely, tables
\texttt{vari\_classifier\_result} and \texttt{vari\_rrlyrae}
\citep[see][]{Clementini2018,Holl2018} are joined, removing the
duplicates, and the stellar astrometry and photometry are obtained
from the main \texttt{gaia\_source} catalogue. We have culled
potential interlopers requiring \textit{phot\_bp\_rp\_excess\_factor}
to be less than 3 and have assumed $A_G=2.27$ and $M_G=0.64$ for the
extinction coefficient and the RRL absolute magnitude in the \Gaia's
$G$ band respectively \citep[see][for further
  details]{Iorio2018}. Additionally, we have assumed the Sun's
distance from the Galactic center of 8 kpc, the Local Standard or Rest
(LSR) of 235 km s$^{-1}$ and the Sun's peculiar motion as given in
\citet{LSR}.

To select the likely OS members, we translate the stellar celestial
coordinates in equatorial system $(\alpha, \delta)$ into a new
coordinate system $(\phi_1, \phi_2)$ aligned with the stream
\citep[see e.g.][]{Koposov2010}. More specifically, based on the OS
detections reported in \citet{OS_V, OS_C, Newberg2010}, we use a great
circle with a pole at $(\alpha_{\rm OS}, \delta_{\rm
  OS})=(70.5^{\circ}, -13^{\circ})$. The origin of this stream's
coordinate system is chosen to be at $(\alpha_0,
\delta_0)=(188^{\circ}, -63^{\circ})$, near the position of the OS's
crossing of the Galactic disc. Finally, $\phi_1$ increases in the
direction of the stream's motion. Several attempts at the OS kinematic
characterization can be found in \citet{Newberg2010} and
\citet{Sohn2016}. Given the OS's line-of-sight velocity and the
HST-based proper motions, we notice that the stream's velocity
component along the Galactic longitude $v_l$ remains negative
irrespective of the debris position on the sky, i.e. the stream is in
prograde motion with respect to the Galactic rotation. Accordingly, we
explore the distribution of the possible OS members selected with the
following simple cuts.

%
\begin{equation}
  \begin{aligned}
    |\phi_2| &< 4^{\circ}\\
    -300<v_l &<-100\\
    -300<v_b &<300
  \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
%

Figure~\ref{fig:xyzgdr2} shows the distributions of $\sim$1,500 RRL
stars selected with the above cuts in Galacto-centric coordinates
$X,Y$ and $Z$; here $X$ points to the Galactic anti-center and the Sun
is at $(X,Y,Z)=(8,0,0)$. A long and narrow arc or RRL stars is visible
in all three projections, crossing the Galaxy from the North (where it
is seen at $Z>0$ and $X>0$) to the South (where the signal is ar $Z<0$
and $X<0$). The stream spans a gigantic $\sim$100 kpc, traveling in
almost uninterrupted fashion through the Milky Way, coming as close as
$\sim$15 kpc to its center and reaching as far as $\sim$50 kpc into
the halo. While the Northern portion of the stream had been seen
before with SDSS and PS1, the view of its Southern Galactic section
uncovered here with \gaia DR2 is entirely new.

We can further clean the OS membership by looking closely at the
behavior of the RRL stars close to the equator of the stream's
coordinate system. To this end, Figure~\ref{fig:selection} shows the
distribution of RR Lyrae as a function of the along-stream coordinate
$\phi_2$. As the top panel of the Figure illustrates, the stream spans
some $\sim200^{\circ}$ in $\phi_1$ while exhibiting a slight bend of
several degrees in $\phi_2$. The heliocentric distance of the Orphan
debris changes slowly within $-50^{\circ}<\phi_1<50^{\circ}$, but
beyond that, the stream appears to shoot rapidly to large distances,
reaching $\sim50$ kpc on either end. Finally, a clear kinematic
pattern is visible in the bottom panel of Figure~\ref{fig:selection},
where the stream $\mu_{\phi,1}$ proper motion arches up to $\sim$4 mas
year$^{-1}$ around $\phi_1\sim40^{\circ}$ from values close to $\sim0$
mas year$^{-1}$ near the tips of the stream. Note that in all three
projections, the width of the stream also changes as a function of
$\phi_1$. Some of this variation may be due to the intrinsic evolution
of the debris density along the stream \citep[see e.g.][]{stray}, but
much of it may plausibly be associated with the change in the
measurement quality. As the stream moves away from the Sun at high
values of $|\phi_1|$, the associated errors in distance and proper
motion grow quickly, increasing the scatter around the stream's
centroid. 

Each panel of Figure~\ref{fig:selection} shows a sample of stars
selected after applying the polynomial masks from the other two panels
(the masked areas are highlighted in pale blue in each panel). The
boundaries of the masks are chosen to wrap around the bulk of the
stream's debris in a smooth and continuous manner. More precisely, the
masks are drawn as follow {\bf SK to explain}. The parameters of the
polynomials used for the stream selection are given in table XXX. {\bf
  SK to supply}. Applying all three masks shown in the Figure yields
the total of NNN OS candidate members. Table YYY lists all RRL stars
identified using the procedure described above together with their
positional and kinematic measurements from GDR2. {\bf Table
  needed}.

Figure~\ref{fig:xyzmem} is a companion to Figure~\ref{fig:xyzgdr2} as
it also shows the Galacto-centric positions of the \gaia RR Lyrae
stars, but now only those selected using the masks described
above. Left panel of the Figure emphasizes the high eccentricity of
the OS as the stream appears high stretched in this
projection. Noticeable in the middle and right panels of the Figure is
the change in the stream's curvature between the Southern and the
North Galactic hemispheres. The view of the OS in other phase-space
projections can be found in Figure~\ref{fig:memother}.

Top left panel of the Figure presents the on-sky positions of the
likely OS members in the stream-aligned coordinate system. Immediately
apparent is the striking change of the stream curvature around
$20^{\circ}<\phi_1<50^{\circ}$ - immediately after the stream re-emerges after
passing through the Galactic disc - where the debris behavior changes
from gently slopping down to sharply rising up in
$\phi_2$. Additionally, in the Northern end of the stream, at
$\phi_1\sim100^{\circ}$ there appears to be a curious hook
downwards. There exists a corresponding change in the debris
kinematics. For example, proper motion components $\mu_{\alpha}$ and
$\mu_{\delta}$ also show a switch in the gradient as a function of
$\phi_1$ around $\phi_1\sim20^{\circ}$. Note, however that the
evolution of the physical velocity components $v_l$ and $v_b$ (and
also $v_{\phi,1}$ and $v_{\phi,2}$) is considerably
smoother. Therefore, some of the change in the proper motions (shown
in the second row from the top) is due to the change in the
line-of-sight distance.

One extraordinary feature observed in Figure~\ref{fig:memother} is the
strong deviation of the across-stream velocity component $v_{\phi,2}$
from zero for $-50^{\circ}<\phi_1<0^{\circ}$. In this wide range of
stream longitude - corresponding to the locations under the Galactic
plane - $v_{\phi,2}\sim50$ km s$^{-1}$, while in the North
$v_{\phi,2}$ is mostly consistent with 0 km s$^{-1}$. Note that in a
static gravitational potential, the stars in a cold stellar stream are
expected to move along to the direction delineated by the stream
track, i.e. with $v_{\phi,2}\sim0^{\circ}$ (see e.g. Koposov et al
2010, Erkal 2018 REFERENCES NEEDED). Exceptions to this rule are small
regions around the location of the progenitor as well as near the
apo-center. We conjecture that the observed misalignment between the
motion of the RR Lyrae and the stream path is indicative of a strong
perturbation experienced by the stream in not-so-distant past. A large
and massive deflector is required to divert orbits of stars in such an
extended portion of the stream.

\section{OS stars in \Gaia, DECaLS and SDSS}
\label{sec:rgb}

%
\begin{figure*}
  \centering \includegraphics{gaia_fit_plot.pdf}
  \caption[]{{\it Left panel:} The density distribution of Gaia red
    giant branch stars in the Northern galactic hemisphere. The stars
    were selected based on color-magnitude and proper motions to be
    likely Orphan members. {\it Right panel:} The stream model.  }
   \label{fig:gaia_track}
\end{figure*}
%

%
\begin{figure*}
\includegraphics{decals_map.pdf}
\caption{{\it Top panel:} The stellar density of matched filter
  selected stars near Orphan stream. We used the old metal-poor
  isochrone shifted to the distance of Orphan at each $\phi_1$ to
  define the matched filter. {\it Bottom panel:} The model of the
  stream.}
\label{fig:decals_track}
\end{figure*}
%

\subsection{Track on the sky}

Guided by the RR Lyrae detections, we now chart the locations of the
OS debris using other stellar tracers. We start by identifying the
stream's signal in the color-magnitude space. First, we use \Gaia's
$G_{rm BP}$ and $G_{\rm RP}$ photometry corrected for
extinction. DESCRIBE EXTINCTION CORRECTION. Stars are shifted back in
helio-centric distances to correct for the distance evolution along
the stream as dictated by the RR Lyrae (see previos Section). The
tentative stream members are selected using their proximity to the OS
on the sky, namely DESCRIBE SELECTION and in proper motion space,
namely DESCRIBE SELECTION. The combination of these two cuts yields a
clear overdensity in the CMD, which we trace using DESCRIBE CMD
SELECTION. 

Figure~\ref{fig:gaia_track} presents the view of the OS as seen with
the GDR Red Giants. Left panel of the Figure shows the density of the
OS RG candidates in the stream-aligned coordinates $\phi_1$ and
$\phi_2$. Between $\phi_1\sim20^{\circ}$ and $\phi_1\sim120^{\circ}$,
the stream is easily recognizable, but is hard to trace outside of
this region. Below $\phi_1\sim20^{\circ}$, Galactic foreground starts
to dominate, while above $\phi_1\sim120^{\circ}$, the stream moves too
far away and its RG density drops below levels detectable in
GDR2. Middle panel of Figure~\ref{fig:gaia_track} displays the
best-fit model representing the data, both the stream and the Galactic
foreground in the plane of $\phi_1$ and $\phi_2$. DESCRIBE THE
MODEL. The right panel of the Figure shows the model residuals,
demonstrating the quality of the reconstruction produced. A companion
Figure~\ref{fig:decals_track} gives the similar information but for
the DECaLS data. DESCRIBE THE DECALS MODELING.

Figure~\ref{fig:compare_track} compares the properties of the stream
tracks obtained using the GDR2 RR Lyrae (faint blue circles), the GDR2
RGs (solid black) and the DECaLS matched-filtered data (solid
grey). It is reassuring to see that the GDR2 RG and DECaLS $\phi_2$
centroids of the tidal debris shown in the top panel of the Figure as
a function of $\phi_1$ agree with each other as well as with the
on-sky positions of the GDR2 RR Lyrae. Interestingly, for
$70^{\circ}<\phi_1<100^{\circ}$, both GDR2 RG and DECaLS tracks show
an offset downwards with respect to the RR Lyrae locations. This
mismatch is small (i.e. well within the associated uncertainties) but
systematic. Curiously, there aslo appears to be a slight inconsistency
between the behavior of GDR2 RG and DECaLS RG/MSTO stars as
demonstrated in the bottom panel of
Figure~\ref{fig:compare_track}. Here, the width of the stream track is
plotted as a function of $\phi_1$. In the same region of the sky, i.e
$70^{\circ}<\phi_1<100^{\circ}$, the DECaLS-based measurements yields
a slightly higher stream width compared to that deduced from the GDR2
RG sample. One possible explanation of the minor inconsistencies in
the stream track measurements with different stellar tracers could be
the strong variation of the foreground in this portion of the sky. As
Figure~\ref{fig:decals_track} demonstrates, the region with
$70^{\circ}<\phi_1<90^{\circ}$ is affected by the presence of the
prominent and broad Sagittarius tidal stream.

\subsection{The Stream's CMD}

Having clarified the distribution of the OS stars on the sky, we can
now refine the stream's signal in the CMD. The Stream's Hess diagram
(density of stars in the CMD space) based on the combination of GDR2
and DECaLS data is shown in Figure~\ref{fig:cmd_decals} EXPLAIN FOR
WHAT RANGE of PHI1. While \gaia comfortably detects the streams RR
Lyrae and Red Giants, it is to shallow to reach the Main Sequence
Turn-Off at the distances of the OS tidal debris. The addition of the
deeper DECaLS data allows us to reach the MSTO and thus break the
distance-metallicity degeneracy. Dark regions (corresponding to
over-dense portions of the Hess diagram) in
Figure~\ref{fig:cmd_decals} reveal familiar sub-sets of a co-distant
and co-evol stellar population. The most prominent feature here is the
Ref Giant branch, but a tight Horizontal Branch is also clearly
visible attesting to the quality of the distance measurements. Less
obvious, but also discernible are hints of the Asymptotic Giant Branch
and perhaps even the Blue Stragglers. Given the presence of the MSTO
and with an accurate distance measurement in hand we can overlay the
appropriate isochrone. As evidenced from the Figure, an old metal-poor
([Fe/H]=-2, blue line) isochrone is too bright for the Stream's MSTO
and too steep for its RGB. An isochrone with [Fe/H]]-1.5 (red line)
  does a better job at describing the OS stellar populations.

Figure~\ref{fig:cmd_gaia} compares the CMDs constructed separately for
the portion of the Stream detected in the Galactic North (left panel)
and South (right panel). These Hess diagrams use \Gaia data only and
apply cuts on the star's proximity to the OS track on the sky and in
the proper motion space CLARIFY WHAT CUTS. Limited to the \gaia-only
and North-only data, the Strem's CMD appears tidier than that shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:cmd_decals}, albeit reaching only to the bottom of the
RGB. The CMD of the Southern part of the Stream (right panel), on the
other hand, looks clearly worse, most likely due to higher levels of
Galactic extinction and foreground contamination. Nonetheless, the two
Hess diagrams seem to share several features in common: the brighter
portions of the RGB, the hints of the AGB and the HB. Given the large
amount of noise in the Southern OS CMD, we can only conclude that the
stream stellar populations below and above the Galactic disk are
roughly consistent with each other, but slight differences are still
permitted by the data in hand.

\subsection{Stream's radial velocities in the SDSS}

\section{Discussion and Conclusions}
\label{sec:conc}

We have provided an unprecedented view of the Orphan Stream based
predominantly on the \Gaia DR2 RR Lyrae. These old and metal-poor
pulsating stars are relatively numerous in the OS, with the average
density of $\sim0.5$ per deg$^2$ and can be traced over $210^{\circ}$
reaching distances of 60-70 kpc from the Sun on either side of the
Galactic plane. Viewed with the GDR2 RR Lyrae, the OS appears long and
eccentric, piercing the Milky Way's disk at around 10 kpc and reaching
far into the Galactic halo, more or less in agreement with the earlier
studies (CITATIONS NEEDED). At first glance, half of our stream
detections appear new as they are located under the Galactic plane. As
illustrated in Figure XXX, the Southern portion of the stream crosses
the footprint of the Dark Energy Survey. On closer examination, it is
evident that the Southern part of the Orphan Stream is entirely
consistent with the DES stream Chenab \citep[see][]{Shipp2018}. It is
likely that Chenab stars were not identified as Orphan's due to the
dramatic twist in the OS track on the sky around
$30^{\circ}<\phi_1<50^{\circ}$.

%
\begin{figure}
  \centering \includegraphics{gaia_fit_plot2.pdf}
  \caption[]{{\it Top panel:} The track of Orphan stream as traced
    from by RR Lyrae in Gaia, RGB in Gaia and MSTO and RGB stars in
    DECaLS survey. RR Lyrae are shown by blue points. The black line
    with error-bars shows the extracted track from Gaia RGB stars. The
    grey line shows the stream track from DECaLS data. {\it Bottom
      panel:} The stream width (Gaussian $\sigma$) as a function of
    angle along the stream, as measured from Gaia RGB stars (black
    line) and DECaLS (grey line). }
   \label{fig:compare_track}
\end{figure}
%

%
\begin{figure}
\includegraphics{decals_gaia_cmd.pdf}
\caption{The background subtracted absolute magnitude Hess diagram of
  the Nothern Orphan stream. We use the combination of DECaLS DR7 and
  Gaia DR2 data. The stars were selected based on Gaia proper motion
  $|\mu_{\phi,1}-\mu_{\phi,1,model}|<1$, $|\mu_{\phi,2}|<1$ (CHECK)
  and proximity to the stream track $|\phi_2 - \phi_{2,model}|<1$. The
  magnitudes are corrected by the distance modulus model determined
  from RRLyrae (see Fig. X). We overplot two old 12\,Gyr PARSEC
  isochrones for [Fe/H]=-2,-1.5.  }
\label{fig:cmd_decals}
\end{figure}
%

%
\begin{figure}
\includegraphics{gaia_cmd.pdf}
\caption{The Gaia based background subtracted Hess diagrams of the
  Northern and Souther parts of the stream. Similarly to
  Fig.~\ref{fig:cmd_decals} the stars were selected based on proper
  motion and proximity to the track on the sky. The right panel
  includes the data with $30<\phi_1<150$. The left panel includes data
  from $-40<\phi_1<-20$.}
\label{fig:cmd_gaia}
\end{figure}
%

%
\begin{figure}
\includegraphics{orphan_spec.pdf}
\caption{The heliocentric radial velocity of the nothern stream stars
  selected by the position on the sky, proper motion and
  color-magnitudes.  The stars within 1 degrees of the track of the
  stream are shown by solid grey circles, the stars between 1 and 2
  degrees are shown by black circles. We remark that the radial
  velocities are approaching zero near $\phi_1 \sim 30 $ deg, wher the
  heliocentric distances reach the minimum (as seen on Fig.XXX)}
\label{fig:hrv}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics{orphan_rv_meas.pdf}
\caption{The results of modeling the Radial velocity distribution shown on Fig.XXX. The top panel shows the 16,84 boundary of the fitted spline model and 
the points with error-bars show the mean and stddev of the velocities at the spline knots. The bottom panel shows the velocity dispersion measurement. }
\label{fig:hrv_model}
\end{figure}

%


\section*{Acknowledgments}

We thank Michael for an illuminating discussion. The research leading
to these results has received funding from the European Research
Council under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme
(FP/2007-2013) / ERC Grant Agreement n. 308024.

This work presents results from the European Space Agency (ESA) space
mission Gaia. Gaia data are being processed by the Gaia Data
Processing and Analysis Consortium (DPAC). Funding for the DPAC is
provided by national institutions, in particular the institutions
participating in the Gaia MultiLateral Agreement (MLA). The Gaia
mission website is https://www.cosmos.esa.int/gaia. The Gaia archive
website is https://archives.esac.esa.int/gaia.


\bibliography{references}

\label{lastpage}

\end{document}

